Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Science fiction writer George R.R. Martin
recently had his third novel, Fevre Dream, published in hardcover by Poseidon
Press. Fevre Dream is a science fictional historical horror novel which combines
the vampire legend and Mississippi riverboats in the antebellum south. We asked
Martin why he chose to write about a combination of vampires and riverboats. The
vampires came first as I was putting the book together. I had read a fair amount
about vampires. I had read other people's vampire novels as far as Dracula and
some of the other books done recently. And I had wanted to do my own version of
that legend for some time because I had a few ideas about it. But I didn't want
it to be just another Dracula book, just another rehash of the same old legend.
Because we've seen vampire books after vampire books that are essentially just
the same thing spun over and over again. And I think that's a little tiresome.
And at the same time I was going through all these thoughts about vampires was
the period that I was living in Dubuque, Iowa. I taught college there for three
years. And Dubuque, of course, is an old river town. It was once a big steamboat
manufacturing center. And it's still very much imbued with the whole history of
the great era of steam on the Mississippi. So it was during that period while I
was in Dubuque that I got interested in that period of history. I got interested
in the steamboats. I read a fair amount about them. And once I did, the two
things just seemed to come together in my mind. And there's a certain
romanticism, I think, a dark romanticism that clings to both the old steamboats
and vampires. They're both very attractive in a certain sense. The elegant
vampire and the stately, intricate, gorgeous steamboat. But they also have dark
sides, too, of course.
In Fevre Dream, the protagonist, Captain Abner Marsh, owner of a failing
steamboat company, the Fevre River Packet Line, realizes his lifelong dream of
captaining a fast, luxurious steamboat when he becomes partners with the
mysterious Joshua York. All Marsh has to do to maintain the partnership and keep
the fancy steamboat is sail up and down the river and avoid questioning York's
somewhat odd habits. But York begins bringing aboard a strange retinue of
acquaintances, all of whom have nocturnal habits. And, of course, Marsh has
difficulty staying his curiosity. As Marsh learns about York and his friends, he
discovers they are vampires. But Martin presents vampires in a manner never seen
in fantasy. He explains them in rational terms. This meant including some of the
legendary characteristics of vampires, but leaving others out. I wanted to have
rationalized vampires. I wanted to have vampires that I thought could actually
exist, that were not based on, you know, vague supernatural legends handed down
over the years. So I had to look at each of the particular beliefs associated
with vampires and see if there is any way that I could justify this in a
rational manner. Now, obviously, something about vampires not coming out during
day, which the vampires in my book, Fevre Dream, do have that characteristic.
Well, that's very easily explainable. It's just they're nocturnal creatures.
Their skin is extremely sensitive to ultraviolet, so they burn very badly if
they're exposed to daylight. So they avoid it. You can justify that easily. But
you look at something, they're not reflected in mirrors. I mean, there's no way
to justify not being reflected in mirrors scientifically. You have to rewrite,
essentially, all the laws governing light and reflection and refraction and so
on. That's strictly a supernatural motif, so I had to get rid of that.
Obviously, considering that the book is about vampires on Mississippi River
steamboats, I had to get rid of the one that said they can't cross running water
as well, since they sail up and down the steamboat all through the book. More on
George Martin's Fevre Dream on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Science fiction writer George R.R. Martin's
latest novel, Fevre Dream, a science fictional historical horror effort, was
recently published in hardcover by Poseidon Press and distributed by Simon &
Schuster. As we discussed in our last show, the book combines elements of the
vampire legend and a Mark Twain-like presentation of Mississippi riverboat lore.
Joshua York, the partner of Captain Abner Marsh, is a vampire who has managed to
concoct a potion which will alleviate the red thirst. The scourge which visits
the vampires in Martin's novel periodically and drives them into an
uncontrollable state of bloodlust, which can only be satiated by human blood,
preferably that from young, attractive, living humans. The humans, by the way,
are deprecatingly referred to by some of the vampires as cattle. The existence
of the potion is the key to Martin's novel. It gives the vampires a choice. They
can continue feasting on the blood of the cattle, or they can finally quit
terrorizing the human race and drink only the artificial brew. This choice is
another element which separates Martin's vampires from those of traditional
fantasy. I suppose as much as anything else, I mean, the book is about vampires
on Mississippi river steamboats, but in a deeper sense, it's about moral
choices. And one of the things that Joshua York, the vampire, says to Abner,
Abner Marsh, the protagonist, and that Abner later says back to him is, You make
your choices.
It's a real world, but it's a real world kind of a hollow construct. The real
world is made up of greys. I think real people are made up of greys. We don't
have absolute goods, and we don't have absolute evils. The good and evil that we
have, you know, resides in each of us, and it is a matter of moral choice. Damon
Julian is a charismatic elder vampire who rejects the potion. He did make a
choice eons ago, but he also makes the choice in terms of the book at the
banquet when he essentially rejects what Joshua has to offer.
And states his opposition to Joshua with saying, you know, we are born, this is
what we are born to be, masters of humanity, people who take the lives of those
inferior to us. And this is our nature. So he is making a choice there. He's
rejecting Joshua's potion. He's rejecting the freedom from the red thirst that
Joshua offers, and he's accepting what he thinks is of his superior nature.
Martin told us that he found a close parallel between Julian's view of the human
race and slavery as it existed in the South at the time of the book, 1857. Of
course, there's also certain, you know, resonances there with the whole slavery
thing, which I tried to put through all the way through the book. It takes place
in the antebellum South, late antebellum South, and slavery issue, of course, is
very hot then. And the whole master-slave thing that existed between blacks and
whites in the South then has a kind of fantasy reflection in relations between
vampires. And human beings. This parallel even strikes Abner Marsh as the story
progresses. Abner Marsh is never an evil man. I think by nature he is a good
man. But he is a man at the beginning of the book who is essentially just living
his own life. And the great moral issues of his time, like slavery, are, you
know, things he kind of hashes out over the dinner table but never has any great
personal involvement in.
But as a result of the whole experience with the steamer Fevre Dream and the
things that happen to him, I think Marsh changes and becomes, in essence, a man
who is much more aware of the necessity to make moral choices. More on George
Martin's Fevre Dream on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science Fiction author George R.R. Martin's
latest novel is Fevre Dream, a science fictional historical horror story about
vampires in Mississippi river boats. Here Martin explains the title of the book.
The title of the book is taken from the name of the steamboat in the book. The
Fevre Dream is named the steamboat. And the reason Abner Marsh names the
steamboat the Fevre Dream is because it is the boat he has always dreamed of
having, the grand, luxurious, fast steamer. And because he is the president, his
company is called Fevre River Package Company, with that odd spelling, the R-E
inverted. Okay, that explains the origin of Fevre Dream. But where did the oddly
spelled fevre originate? It has to do with Captain Marsh's birthplace. He was
born in Galena, Illinois. And the river Galena is located on a small tributary
that comes off the Mississippi, which originally was named the Fevre River, F-E
-V-R-E River, in the early 1800s. And Marsh, of course, was born during that
period and grew up calling it. And in point of fact, and this is all
historically true, the name of that river was changed to the Galena River fairly
early on because, you know, the town got respectable and they didn't want people
thinking they were all sick there. So they thought it would be better to call it
the Galena River. But Galena was a very important steamboat town. And the Fevre
in its early days, today it's nothing but a creek. It's completely silted up and
I've visited it and you couldn't get a rowboat up it, let alone a major steamer.
But in the early 1800s, Galena was a major steamboat port. And the Fevre, or the
Galena River, as it later became, was a very bustling little tributary indeed.
We asked Martin if there were actual steamboats as fast and as luxurious as the
Fevre Dream. The dimensions of the Fevre Dream and the capacity of her engines
and so forth are modeled very closely on the Eclipse. In terms of the book, the
Eclipse is the queen of the river, the fastest, largest, and most luxurious
boat. And it's the one Abner Marsh aspires to displace as fastest steamer on the
river, and that's why he built the Fevre Dream. The Eclipse was a real
historical boat of its era, the 1850s, and was considered the fastest boat of
that era. It did indeed win a very famous steamboat race against the Shotwell.
And some people, including Mark Twain, put forward evidence that the Fevre Dream
was in fact the fastest steamer ever on the river. And there were later steamers
in the 1870s and the 1880s that, while they were not perhaps as fast as the
Fevre Dream in the book or the Eclipse in real life, were even more luxurious,
like the J.M. White, a very fast and incredibly luxurious steamer of the 1870s,
1880s. One of the interesting facts that strikes the reader is that riverboats
were extremely short-lived. That was one of the interesting things that turned
up when I was researching it that kind of startled me, too. I mean, they're such
formidable-looking structures. You'd think they'd be around for ages. But, in
fact, they had a shorter lifespan than the modern car. Martin had to do
considerable research on steamboats to ensure the accuracy of the historical
details in Fevre Dream. It took me two years to do Fevre Dream altogether. The
first year of that was largely research. So a lot of research did go into it,
yes. I think that's a necessity if you're going to do justice to any sort of
historical fiction. Fevre Dream, of course, is historical horror, but I still
think you owe your readers that debt of accuracy insofar as you're capable of
it. More with George Martin on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. One of the most popular genres in mass
market literature is the horror genre. We asked science fiction author George R
.R. Martin, author of the recently published horror novel Fevre Dream, why he
thinks the horror genre is currently so successful. I think people may be going
to horror because it's... In horror novels, we're scared, yeah, but we can kind
of control the scares. And, you know, we can read the book and scare ourselves.
But then we put down the book and we know that what we're afraid of, vampires,
werewolves, haunted hotels, whatever,
is not real. And people don't mind dealing with that and kind of getting a
little catharsis out of that. But they don't want to deal with real, the real
terrifying things, violence in the streets and crime and crazed psychos out
there and the threat of nuclear holocaust and all of the other more real fears
that also hang over us. So I think that may be part of it. There are many
creatures that embody horror in the literature. Ghosts, monsters, ghouls,
werewolves, witches. But probably the most enduring image of horror is the
vampire, the nocturnal stalker who drinks the blood of its unwary victims. The
vampire legend spans many cultures. Here Martin tells us about the vampire
legend and the reasons why the legend may be so popular even now. Vampires are
an almost universal legend, which is one thing that turned out when I was
researching Fevre Dream. The vampires we're familiar with, of course, Dracula
and his kin, so to speak, and all the books that are derived from that tradition
are essentially retreads of Eastern European, Romanian, Hungarian, largely
vampire legends. But if you look around the world, you'll find vampire legends
everywhere. In China, in Africa, in the South Seas, there are variants of the
vampire legend. The details differ. But the basic vision of a nocturnal predator
that preys on human beings is present in all of these. And so that would lead
you to wonder why do they have this universal appeal. The easy answer as to why
they're appealing in our culture today, in modern American mass society, I
think, is the sexual nature of the vampire, the sexual symbolism embodied in
Dracula and in the way it's been treated by Hollywood sense, the symbolism of
vampire as seductor,
appeals to something within us and gives legend a lot more resonances than, say,
the werewolf legend or zombies or some of the other things that have never
really achieved the popularity of the vampire legend. But then you could say,
well, that's true for us, but it doesn't explain why the legend is so universal
around the world. And indeed it doesn't, and I don't have an answer for that.
Martin tells us here how he incorporated this universal, transcultural concept
of the vampire in Fevre Dream. In terms of Fevre Dream, I looked at that
universality and I made it one of the bases when I started writing the novel. I
said, what if the reason that these legends are universal is because they're all
remembering the same thing? They're all remembering some kind of racial memory
of a real man-like predatory animal, blood drinker, that is somehow the basis
for all the vampire legends. And that was the premise that I, of course, used in
Fevre Dream.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.